rhetoric really gets a bad name in the
21st century people tend to think either
we're dealing with real philosophy or
just a problem of rhetoric as if
rhetoric means fake philosophy either
we're dealing with real politics real
political differences or just a problem
of rhetoric as if rhetoric means fake
politics rhetoric is a category of the
human experience that involves real
problems with real solutions in this
video we could say it's about a problem
of practical philosophy but it's a
rhetorical solution that's been really
useful to me in my adult life I have
this habit of responding to accusations
allegations and arguments from my fellow
middle-aged people by telling them look
I'm a terrible person I'm not going to
debate with you whether or not I'm a
good person but I'm doing the best I can
and I need your help why is this
rhetorical device so significant you
know it started off in my life when I
was living in Laos when I was living in
Laos and maybe before that when I was
living in Thailand some other parts of
Asia and I would meet and interact with
and cooperate with other Europeans often
British and I'd have to say to them
again and again look I'm not a nice guy
now why did I say that why was I giving
them that warning it wasn't that I was
doing anything despicable with my time I
was going to the library going to the
archives spending time in museums
studying stone inscriptions at that time
I was applying to do humanitarian work I
wasn't really doing any humanitarian
work yet
I was applying for jobs for other kinds
too just to pay the rent but a lot of
these other white people mostly British
sometimes Australian they really did
have a profound assumption about what
being a nice guy meant being a nice guy
meant inviting another chap
another white male to come and watch
football at the bar to come and watch
the game
inviting another white guy to play
billiards and has spent quite a lot of
time drinking alcohol and playing
billiards and watching sports that was
really the rhythm of life for them that
was an unexamined assumption about what
it meant to be a good man especially in
middle age you know and what I was
saying to them was look I don't live by
those rules at all I wasn't living a
life like that and I was doing things
that would seem abrupt to them you know
like after work it was like nope now I
gotta ride my bicycle to the gym nope
now I got a cut and run to get to the
archives before they close nope I'm
studying two or three different
languages at the same time nope I'm
running around with my resume and
applying for minute errand work I had
all these ambitions that animated me in
life and it didn't mean I sneered at
these other white Westerners who were
there most of them were talking about
expats not talking about people on
vacation people who live there people
who had jobs but it was really saying to
them don't hold me to this standard you
hold yourself to don't be disappointed
in me when it turns out I'm not a nice
guy you invite me to a birthday party
and that birthday party is gonna involve
drinking alcohol smoking cigarettes
playing billiards watching the game this
is kind of its kind of stuff and I don't
show up you know thank you say thank you
for the invitation and I won't show up
because I'm not a nice guy
right again doesn't mean I was about to
backstab anyone was didn't mean I was a
ruthless competitor I wasn't a you know
wasn't trying to trample on them to get
ahead but it was actually really
important to my day-to-day existence
there that I got that point across and
then with all due humility whatever kind
of limited friendship whatever kind of
relation between colleagues I could have
with these other foreigners living in
Laos would then have to start on that
basis okay so he's not a nice guy he's
not one of us he doesn't play by those
rules and I promise you at that time in
VN Chen the capital city of Laos there
really was a
demi-monde of white foreigners some in
the humanitarian industry some in the
for-profit industry and you know the
lifeblood of that community was
absolutely going to those birthday
parties going to those sports bars those
social events that was what their
community was built on you know and I
chose to be an outsider I chose to let
them know that's not what I'm here for
those not the rules I play ball and you
know I'm not gonna make the kind of
moral compromises you guys make which is
another long story and you know maybe
from their perspective I'm an immoral
person or a terrible person that's okay
where do we go from here now I've been
in a lot of very tense situations gets
other middle-aged people identify as a
middle-aged person sometimes you know
few years old than me it's an eyes
around the same age and I find that very
often in these conflicts there's a
really deep level on which they assume
that what's being disputed here is not
the practical problem at hand but is a
question of impugning their own sense of
themselves as a good person a lot of us
a lot of us live our lives as if the
question we have to ask is who do you
think you are don't you know who I think
I am as if this question of how we
define ourselves as good people is being
raised again and again in the context of
conflicts that really aren't about who
we are and whether or not we're good
people on any deep level at all you know
I remember one conflict especially with
a professor but this is true of I think
many interactions professors have had
many interactions field had were my
superiors in some kind of hierarchical
situation one in particular were you
know I came in and talked to this
professor because I was really concerned
we were skipping one chapter of the
textbook this was a Chinese language
textbook as I look when are we going to
cover this vocabulary how are we going
to learn this for the final exam and
someone this is this is really a problem
on a practical level skipping this this
Chapman textbook and that professor
reacted is
was insulting her or impugning her or
saying you're a terrible professor
you're a terrible person you're
incompetent as if really the meaning of
this is you're a bad person and it's not
the meaning of it is the problem at hand
is skipping this chapter the textbook
and that's what I want to address and
she did respond both defensively and
offensively by attacking me and
insulting me and saying I was a bad
person and saying I was a bad student
that is an understatement she got really
aggravated and she said really rude she
said really rude things that a professor
should should never say to a student by
the way but I didn't get angry back and
I didn't defend myself if I get
defensive and I got stuck in then we're
both in this trap where it's all about
who do you think you are don't you know
who I think I am and it becomes about
ego versus ego and again what's really
being disputed is how do I think of
myself as a good person and project this
image this concept of myself as a good
person to other people and get them to
recognize they get them to affirm it
back to me and in that dispute I said to
her straight up I said you're right I'm
a terrible person and I'm a terrible
student but I need your help I came here
today I'm in your office now because I'm
asking for your help yeah you're right
now I'm a bad student good I accept that
I'm not gonna debate with you within an
embezzler I'm a bad person I'm a
terrible person I'm not here to debate
that with you do you think that only
good people need your help do you think
that only good students need your help
I'm asking for you to do the right thing
I'm asking for your help
and if other people can respond to that
positively it then puts us on a very
different footing it's like no no I'm
not trying to get the moral high ground
here and I don't want you and me to get
into a contest over who's on that moral
high ground I'll gladly accept the the
moral low ground I'll be the bad guy no
problem but I'm here as a bad guy who's
doing the best I can
I'm not saying I'm good I'm completely
accepting your accusations and
allegations that I'm bad but I'm doing
the best I can
and I need your help I remember at the
end of that meeting with that particular
professor she saw my Chinese handwriting
and she was blown away because of course
I was I was probably the best student in
that class by far even like when my
handwriting was exponentially better
than a Chinese but uh I think she quite
liked the idea that I was a terrible
student and then you know just literally
I was packing up my my books to leave
her office demeaning she said that is
your handwriting she really gasped she
was amazed at how good my Chinese every
once I said yes that's my handwriting
writing rapidly taking notes in class
writing Chinese you know it wasn't
calligraphic it wasn't slow and careful
it was really rapid and it was compared
to her other students it was already at
that stage really good so strange tense
difficult situation probably the single
most extreme situation in which I used
this rhetorical method because it is
about rhetoric and we're not really
talking about here whether or not we
should aspire to be good people was
actually at an airport in Taiwan got up
the airport counter a little bit too
late and this guy again he got into this
really defensive mode he got really
angry he was trembling and he was really
kind of insulting and denouncing me at
the at the check-in counter and you know
fundamentally his point was this was all
my fault
I should have been in a different place
20 minutes earlier than it was I should
have known to line up in the right place
20 minutes earlier than when I got there
and when I got there I should have
skipped to the front of the queue I
shouldn't have just politely lined up
which is what i did i just stood there
silently in line waiting to get to the
front which was the wrong move
apparently at this airport how they
organized these things and you know he
was blaming everything on me in
attacking me and so on and i think he
fully expected probably on the basis of
his past experience for the customers he
thought i was going to come back at the
same way like he felt like the situation
we were in meant that i was questioning
his professionalism or his that he is a
good person or that he's good at his job
and that i was gonna come back at him by
blaming him and saying no you know you
did something wrong you closed the kiosk
when you shouldn't have and the sign was
wrong and
how could I have figured it out like he
thought it was gonna get into a back and
forth this way and I remember he was
even specifying if I had read the fine
print on my ticket which was in Chinese
of course like I should have been able
to figure this out was okay but he's
really blaming me and so on and I didn't
come back at him by saying no it's your
fault or no you did something wrong no
you're about your job I know you're a
bad person what I said back in that
situation was you're right I'm a
terrible person
you have no idea I've done bad things in
my life I've made bad decisions but I'm
asking you for help I'm not gonna debate
with you whose fault this is
I'm not going to be with you whether or
not a good person I'm a terrible person
you don't know the half you don't know
what I'm capable of I need your help you
know can you calm down can you stop
insulting me
can you stop telling me of a bad person
I know that I need your help and it was
really interesting cuz again he was
trembling with Rhett he was he was
really worked up and he stopped and he
turned to the computer and he started he
started helping me he started you know
looking at my case and processing my
ticket and this kind of stuff and just
after a few seconds you know he stopped
and he looked at me and he said and it
was really emotional for him was a
really interesting moment he said that
he was a terrible person too and that I
had no idea you know what the things
he'd done in his life and you know we
just stood there and looked at each
other one terrible person to another and
he looked back in on the keyboard and
got back to work helping me a lot of the
time in an unstated and indirect way
these conflicts escalate because we're
not disputing the problem that is there
to be solved we're not disputing in the
case of the professor this issue with
the textbook and the vocabulary list and
how are we going to cope if we skip this
chapter or at the airport
we're not disputing okay what's the
problem there was confusion but we still
have more than an hour before the plane
leaves can we check you in we're
disputing that we're display we're
disputing whose fault it is and then
that gets much worse because it's no
longer about fault so rapidly we slide
into this trap we're not even discussing
whose fault it is we're discussing who
am i who are you
who do you think you are don't you know
who I think I am people feel that their
own sense of moral identity their own
sense of themselves as a good person
their own sense themselves is a good
professional their own sense of
themselves being good at their job is
being called into question is being
impune just by the fact that you're
standing there asking for help just by
the fact that you were trying to
cooperate with them or collaborate with
them it doesn't always work but if you
can you can try to deflate the anger
hostility and conflict of the situation
by saying look I'll be the bad guy I'll
take all the blame
it's all my fault I don't want to debate
that if you want to think I'm a bad
person good okay I know it I agree with
you 100% and now I need you to set that
aside solve this problem I need your
help